Flyweight pattern is one of the structural design patterns as this pattern provides ways to decrease object count thus improving application required objects structure.
Flyweight pattern is used when we need to create a large number of similar objects (say 105).
One important feature of flyweight objects is that they are immutable.
This means that they cannot be modified once they have been constructed.

Why do we care for number of objects in our program?

Less number of objects reduces the memory usage, and it manages to keep us away from errors related to memory like java.lang.OutOfMemoryError.
Although creating an object in Java is really fast, we can still reduce the execution time of our program by sharing objects.



In Flyweight pattern we use a HashMap that stores reference to the object which have already been created, every object is associated with a key.
Now when a client wants to create an object, he simply has to pass a key associated with it
and if the object has already been created we simply get the reference to that object else it creates a new object and then returns it reference to the client.


This pattern is used to reduce the memory footprint. It can also improve performance in applications where object instantiation is expensive.
Simply put, the flyweight pattern is based on a factory which recycles created objects by storing them after creation.
Each time an object is requested, the factory looks up the object in order to check if it's already been created.
If it has, the existing object is returned – otherwise, a new one is created, stored and then returned.

The main elements of the pattern are:

an interface which defines the operations that the client code can perform on the flyweight object
one or more concrete implementations of our interface
a factory to handle objects instantiation and caching

used to create a large number object by factory pattern. 1st time object created and store in cache.
Next time if any object creation request its get from cache. else create a new one and store in cache.